                            Magnolia Flower

                                   By

                           Zora Neale Hurston

                        The Spokesman July, 1925


The brook laughed and sang. When it encountered hard places in its bed,
it hurled its water in sparkling dance figures up into the moonlight.

It sang louder, louder; danced faster, faster, with a coquettish
splash! at the vegetation on its banks.

At last it danced boisterously into the bosom of the St. John’s,
upsetting the whispering hyacinths who shivered and blushed, drunk with
the delight of moon kisses.

The Mighty One turned peevishly in his bed and washed the feet of
the Palmetto palms so violently that they awoke and began again the
gossip they had left off when the Wind went to bed. A palm cannot speak
without wind. The river had startled it also, for the winds sleep on
the bosom of waters.

The palms murmured noisily of seasons and centuries, mating and birth
and the transplanting of life. Nature knows nothing of death.

The river spoke to the brook.

“Why, O Young Water, do you hurry and hurl yourself so riotously about
with your chatter and song? You disturb my sleep.”

“Because, O Venerable One,” replied the brook, “I am young. The flowers
bloom, the trees and wind say beautiful things to me: there are lovers
beneath the orange trees on my banks,--but most of all because the moon
shines upon me with a full face.”

“That is not sufficient reason for you to disturb my sleep,” the river
retorted. “I have cut down mountains and moved whole valleys into the
sea, and I am not so noisy as _you_ are.”

The river slapped its banks angrily.

“But,” added the brook diffidently, “I passed numbers of lovers as I
came on. There was also a sweet-voiced night-bird.”

“No matter, no matter!” scolded the river. “I have seen millions of
lovers, child. I have borne them up and down, listened to those things
that are uttered more with the breath than with the lips, gathered
infinite tears, and some lovers have even flung themselves upon the
soft couch I keep in my bosom, and slept.”

“Tell me about some of them!” eagerly begged the brook.

“Oh, well,” the river muttered, “I am wide awake now, and I suppose
brooks must be humored.”


                           THE RIVER’S STORY

“Long ago, as men count years, men who were pale of skin held a dark
race of men in a bondage. The dark ones cried out in sorrow and
travail,--not here in my country, but farther north. Many rivers
carried their tears to the sea and the tide would bring some of them to
me. The Wind brought cries without end.

“But there were some among the slaves who did not weep, but fled in the
night to safety,--some to the far north, some to the far south, for
here the red man, the panther, and the bear alone were to be feared.
One of them from the banks of the Savannah came here. He was large and
black and strong. His heart was strong and thudded with an iron sound
in his breast. The forest made way for him, the beasts were afraid of
him, and he built a house. He gathered stones and bits of metal, yellow
and white--such as men love and for which they die--and grew wealthy.
How? I do not know. Rivers take no notice of such things. We sweep men,
stones, metal--all, ALL to the sea. All are as grass; all must to the
sea in the end.

“He married Swift Deer, a Cherokee Maiden, and five years--as men love
to clip Time into bits--passed.

“They had now a daughter, Magnolia Flower they called her, for she came
at the time of their opening.

“When they had been married five years, she was four years old.

“Then the tide brought trouble rumors to me of hate, strife and
destruction,--war, war, war.

“The blood of those born in the North flowed to sea, mingled with that
of the southern-born. Bitter Waters, Troubled Winds. Rains that washed
the dust from Heaven but could not beat back the wails of anguish, the
thirst for blood and glory; the prayers for that which God gives not
into the hands of man--Vengeance,--fires of hate to sear and scorch the
ground: wells of acid tears to blight the leaf.

“Then all men walked free in the land, and Wind and Water again grew
sweet.

“The man-made time notches flew by, and Magnolia Flower was in
full-bloom. Her large eyes burned so brightly in her dark-brown face
that the Negroes trembled when she looked angrily upon them. ‘She
curses with her eyes,’ they said. ‘Some evil surely will follow.’

“Black men came and went now as they pleased and the father had many to
serve him, for now he had built a house such as white men owned when he
was in bondage.

“His heart, of the ex-slave Bentley, was iron to all but Magnolia
Flower. Swift Deer was no longer swift. Too many kicks and blows, too
many grim chokings had slowed her feet and heart.

“He had done violence to workmen. There was little law in this jungle,
and that was his,--‘Do as I bid you or suffer my punishment.’

“He was hated, but feared more.

“He hated anything that bore the slightest resemblance to his former
oppressors. His servants must be black, very black or Cherokee.

“The flower was seventeen and beautiful. Bentley thought often of a
mate for her now, but one that would not offend him either in spirit or
flesh. He must be full of humility, and black.

“One day, as the sun gave me a good-night kiss and the stars began
their revels, I bore a young Negro yet not a Negro, for his skin was
the color of freshly barked cypress, golden with the curly black hair
of the white man.

“There were many Negroes in Bentley’s Village and he wished to build a
school that would teach them useful things.

“Bentley hated him at once; but ordered a school-house to be built, for
he wished Magnolia to read and write.

“But before two weeks had passed, the teacher had taught the Flower to
read strange marvels with her dark eyes, and she had taught the teacher
to sing with his eyes, his hands, his whole body in her presence or
whenever he thought of her,--not in her father’s house, but beneath
that clump of palms, those three that bathe their toes eternally and
talk.

“They busied themselves with dreams of creation, while Bentley swore
the foundation of the school-room into place.

“‘Nothing remains for me to do, now that I have your consent, but to
ask your father for your sweet self. I know I am poor, but I have a
great Vision, a high purpose, and he shall not be ashamed of me!’

“She clung fearfully to him.

“‘No, don’t, John, don’t. He’ll say ‘Naw!’ and cuss. He--he don’t like
you at all. Youse too white.’

“‘I’ll get him out of that, just trust me, precious. Then I can just
_own_ you--just let me talk to him!’

“She wept and pleaded with him--told him of Bentley’s terrible anger
and his violence, begged him to take her away and send her father word;
but he refused to hear her, and walked up to her house and seated
himself upon the broad verandah to wait for the father of Magnolia
Flower.

“She flew to Swift Deer and begged her to persuade her lover not to
brave Bentley’s anger. The older woman crept out and tearfully implored
him to go. He stayed.

“At dusk Bentley came swearing in. It had been a hot day; the men had
cut several poor pieces of timber and seemed all bent on driving him to
the crazy-house, he complained.

“Swift Deer slunk into the house at his approach, dragging her daughter
after her.

“What followed was too violent for words to tell,--strength against
strength, steel against steel. Threats bellowed from Bentley’s bull
throat seemed no more than little puffs of air to the lover. Of course,
he would leave Bentley’s house; but he would stay in the vicinity
until he was told to leave by the Flower,--his Flower of sweetness and
purity--and he would marry her unless hell froze over.

“‘Better eat up dem words an’ git out whilst ah letcher,’ the old man
growled.

“Bentley drew up his lips in a great roll glare.

“‘No!’ John shouted, giving him glare for his rage boiling and tumbling
out from behind these ramparts, as it were. His eye reddened, a vessel
in the center of his forehead stood out, gorged with blood, and his
great hands twitched. For good or evil, Bentley was a strong man, mind
and body.

“Swift Deer could no longer restrain her daughter. Magnolia Flower
burst triumphantly upon the verandah.

“‘Well, papa, you don’t say that I haven’t picked a man. No one else in
forty miles round would stand up to you like John!’

“‘Ham! Jim! Israel!’ Bentley howled, on the verge of apoplexy. The men
appeared. ‘Take dis here yaller skunk an’ lock him in dat back-room.
I’m a gonna hang ’im high as Hamon come sun up, law uh no law.’

“A short struggle, and John was tied hand and foot.

“‘Stop!’ cried Magnolia Flower, fighting, clawing, biting, kicking like
a brown fiend for her lover. One brawny worker held her until John was
helplessly bound.

“But when she looked at all three of the men with her eye of fire, they
shook in superstitious fear.

“‘Oh, Moh Gawd!’ breathed Ham, terrified. ‘She’s cussing us, she’s
cussing us all wid her eyes. Sump’m sho gwine happen.’

“Her eye was indeed something to affright the timid and even give the
strong heart pause. A woman robbed of her love is more terrible than an
army with banners.

“‘Oh, I wish I could!’ she uttered in a voice flat with intensity.
‘You’d all drop dead on the spot.’

“Swift Deer had crept out and stood beside the child. She screamed and
clasped her hands over her daughter’s lips.

“‘Say not such words, Magnolia,’” she pleaded. ‘Take them back into
your bosom unsaid.’

“‘Leave her be,’ Bentley laughed acidly. ‘Ah got a dose uh mah medicine
ready for her too. Befo’ ah hangs dis yaller pole-cat ahm gwinter marry
her to crazy Joe, an’ John kin look on; den ah’ll hang _him_, and
she kin look on. Magnolia and Joe oughter have fine black chillen. Ha!
Ha!’

“The girl never uttered a sound. She smiled with her lips but her eyes
burned every bit of courage to cinders in those who saw her.

“John was locked in the stout back-room. The windows were guarded and
Ham sat with a loaded gun at the door.

“Magnolia was locked in the parlor where she ran up and down, tearing
her heavy black hair. She beat helplessly upon the doors, she hammered
the windows, making little mewing noises in her throat like a cat
deprived of her litter.

“The house grew grimly still. Bentley had forced his wife to accompany
him to their bedroom. She lay fearfully awake but he slept peacefully,
if noisily.

“‘Magnolia Flower!’ Ham called softly as he turned the key stealthily
in the lock of her prison. ‘Come on out. Ah caint stan’ dis here
weekedness uh yo pappy!’

“‘No thank you, Ham. I’ll stay right here and make him kill me long
with John, if you don’t let him out too.’

“‘Lawd a mussy knows ah wisht ah could, but de ole man’s got de key in
his britches.’

“‘I’m going and get it, Ham,’ she announced as she stepped over the
threshold to freedom.

“‘Lawd! He’ll kill me sho’s you born.’

“Her feet were already on the stairs.

“‘I’ll have that key or die. Ham, you put some victuals in that
rowboat.’

“Half for love, half for fear, Ham obeyed.

“No one but Magnolia Flower would have entered Bentley’s bed-room as
she did, under the circumstances but to her the circumstances were her
reasons for going. The big horse pistol under his pillow, the rack of
guns in the hall, and her father’s giant hands--none of these stopped
her. She knew three lives,--her own, her lover’s, and Ham’s--hung on
her success; but she went and returned with that key.

“One minute more and they flew down the path to the three leaning palms
into the boat away northward.

“The morning came. Bentley ate hugely. The new rope hung ominously
from the arm of the giant oak in the yard. Preacher Ike had eaten his
breakfast with Bentley and the idiot, Crazy Joe, had forced himself
into a pair of clean hickory pants.

“Bentley turned the key and flung open the door, stood still a moment
in a grey rage and stalked to the back-room door, feeling for the key
meanwhile.

“When he had fully convinced himself that the key was gone, he did not
bother to open the door.

“‘Ham, it pears dat Magnolia an’ dat yaller dog aint heah dis mawnin’,
so you an’ Swift Deer will hafta do, being ez y’all let ’em git away.’
He said this calmly and stalked toward the gun rack; but his anger was
too large to be contained in one human heart. His arteries corded his
face, his eyes popped, and he fell senseless as he stretched his hand
for the gun. Rage had burst his heart at being outwitted by a girl.

“This all happened more than forty years ago, as men reckon time. Soon
Swift Deer died, and the house built by strong Bentley fell to decay.
White men came and built a town and Magnolia Flower and her eyes passed
from the hearts of people who had known her.”

       *       *       *       *       *

The brook had listened, tensely thrilled to its very bottom at times.
The river flowed calmly on, shimmering under the moon as it moved
ceaselessly to the sea.

An old couple picked their way down to the water’s edge. He had once
been tall--he still bore himself well. The little old woman clung
lovingly to his arm.

“It’s been forty-seven years, John,” she said sweetly, her voice full
of fear. “Do you think we can find the place?”

“Why yes, Magnolia, my Flower, unless they have cut down our trees; but
if they are standing, we’ll know ’em--couldn’t help it.”

“Yes, sweetheart, there they are. Hurry and let’s sit on the roots like
we used to and trail our fingers in the water. Love is wonderful, isn’t
it, dear?”

They hugged the trunks of the three clustering palms lovingly; then
hugged each other and sat down shyly upon the heaped up roots.

“You never have regretted, Magnolia?”

“Of course not! But, John, listen, did you ever hear a river make such
a sound? Why it seems almost as if it were talking--that murmuring
noise, you know.”

“Maybe, it’s welcoming us back. I always felt that it loved you and me,
somehow.”




                          =Transcriber’s Notes=

 Perceived typographical errors have been silently corrected.

 New original cover art included with this eBook is granted to the
 public domain.


*** END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK MAGNOLIA FLOWER ***


    

Updated editions will replace the previous one—the old editions will
be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United
States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG™
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for an eBook, except by following
the terms of the trademark license, including paying royalties for use
of the Project Gutenberg trademark. If you do not charge anything for
copies of this eBook, complying with the trademark license is very
easy. You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose such as creation
of derivative works, reports, performances and research. Project
Gutenberg eBooks may be modified and printed and given away—you may
do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks not protected
by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the trademark
license, especially commercial redistribution.


START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE

PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg”), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Project Gutenberg™ License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg™
electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg™
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg™ electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person
or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B. “Project Gutenberg” is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg™
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation (“the
Foundation” or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg™
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
Project Gutenberg™ name associated with the work. You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg™ License when
you share it without charge with others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Project Gutenberg™ work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country other than the United States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg™ License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg™ work (any work
on which the phrase “Project Gutenberg” appears, or with which the
phrase “Project Gutenberg” is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

    This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and most
    other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
    whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
    of the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online
    at www.gutenberg.org. If you
    are not located in the United States, you will have to check the laws
    of the country where you are located before using this eBook.
  
1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg” associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg™
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg™ License for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg™
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg™.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg™ License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg™ work in a format
other than “Plain Vanilla ASCII” or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg™ website
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original “Plain
Vanilla ASCII” or other form. Any alternate format must include the
full Project Gutenberg™ License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg™ works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
provided that:

    • You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
        the use of Project Gutenberg™ works calculated using the method
        you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
        to the owner of the Project Gutenberg™ trademark, but he has
        agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
        within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
        legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
        payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
        Section 4, “Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
        Literary Archive Foundation.”
    
    • You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
        you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
        does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg™
        License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
        copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
        all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg™
        works.
    
    • You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
        any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
        electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
        receipt of the work.
    
    • You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
        distribution of Project Gutenberg™ works.
    

1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the manager of
the Project Gutenberg™ trademark. Contact the Foundation as set
forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg™ collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain “Defects,” such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the “Right
of Replacement or Refund” described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg™ trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you ‘AS-IS’, WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg™ work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg™ work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg™

Project Gutenberg™ is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg™’s
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg™ collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg™ and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at www.gutenberg.org.

Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non-profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundation’s EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
U.S. federal laws and your state’s laws.

The Foundation’s business office is located at 809 North 1500 West,
Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887. Email contact links and up
to date contact information can be found at the Foundation’s website
and official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg™ depends upon and cannot survive without widespread
public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine-readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular state
visit www.gutenberg.org/donate.

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate.

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg™ electronic works

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
Gutenberg™ concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and
distributed Project Gutenberg™ eBooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg™ eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

Most people start at our website which has the main PG search
facility: www.gutenberg.org.

This website includes information about Project Gutenberg™,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.


